Hotel Management Website Project Documentation
1. Project Title

Hotel Management Website System

Start Date: 11/feb/2026
End Date: 11/mar/2026

Developed By:

Amna Saleem  and studentid 
Maheen Qamar  and studentid 
Laiba Inam and studentid 
Supervisor / Instructor:
Sir Abdullah

Institute:
Aptech Learning Surjani

2. Introduction

This project is a Hotel Management Website designed to help hotels manage their services online.
The system allows users to browse rooms, check availability, and make reservations easily.

This project was developed by students to solve problems related to manual hotel booking systems and provide a modern digital solution.

3. Problem Statement

Many hotels still manage bookings manually which causes problems such as:

Booking conflicts

Difficulty managing customer data

Slow reservation process

Poor user experience

This project solves these problems by creating an online hotel management system.

4. Project Objectives

The main objectives of this project are:

Provide an online room booking system

Manage hotel rooms efficiently

Improve customer experience

Automate hotel management processes

5. About the Hotel

Luxury Hotel is a modern hotel that provides comfortable rooms and quality services to customers.
The hotel offers services such as:
Contact Services
Luxury rooms
Online booking
Customer support
Restaurant services
This website helps the hotel manage its operations digitally.


6. Features of the System

The Hotel Management System provides features for both Guests (Customers) and Admin (Hotel Management) to manage hotel operations efficiently.

6.1 Guest Features
1. User Registration & Login

[IMAGE PLACEHOLDER]

Short Description:
Guests can create an account on the website using the registration form.
After registering, users can log in securely to access booking features and manage their reservations.

2. Room Listing

[IMAGE PLACEHOLDER]

Short Description:
Guests can view a list of available rooms along with details such as room type, price, and facilities before making a reservation.

3. Room Booking Form

[IMAGE PLACEHOLDER]

Short Description:
Guests can fill out a booking form to reserve a room by entering details such as check-in date, check-out date, and number of guests.

4. Booking Summary Page

[IMAGE PLACEHOLDER]

Short Description:
After submitting the booking form, the system displays a booking summary where guests can review their reservation details before proceeding to payment.

5. Online Payment

[IMAGE PLACEHOLDER]

Short Description:
Guests can complete the payment process through the payment page to confirm their booking.

6. Invoice Generation

[IMAGE PLACEHOLDER]

Short Description:
After successful payment, the system automatically generates an invoice for the guest as proof of booking.

7. Contact / Get in Touch
[IMAGE PLACEHOLDER]
Short Description:
Guests can contact the hotel through the website to send inquiries, feedback, or messages.

Guest Booking Process Flow
The booking process for guests follows these steps:

Guest creates booking
↓
Booking status becomes Pending
↓
Booking summary page is displayed
↓
Guest proceeds to Payment page
↓
Payment is completed successfully
↓
System generates Invoice
↓
Admin reviews and confirms the booking
↓
Room is assigned to the guest
↓
Booking status becomes Confirmed


6.2 Admin Panel Features
1. Admin Dashboard

[IMAGE PLACEHOLDER]

Short Description:
The admin dashboard provides an overview of the hotel system including bookings, payments, and revenue statistics.

2. Revenue Chart

[IMAGE PLACEHOLDER]

Short Description:
Admin can view revenue charts and analytics to monitor hotel income and booking trends.

3. Booking Management

[IMAGE PLACEHOLDER]

Short Description:
Admin can view all bookings, confirm reservations, and assign rooms to guests.

4. Payment Management

[IMAGE PLACEHOLDER]

Short Description:
Admin can view all payment records and track completed transactions.

5. Room Management System

[IMAGE PLACEHOLDER]

Short Description:
Admin can manage hotel rooms including adding new rooms, updating room details, and controlling room availability.

6. Staff Management

[IMAGE PLACEHOLDER]

Short Description:
Admin can create and manage staff accounts within the system.

7. Guest Feedback Management

[IMAGE PLACEHOLDER]

Short Description:
Admin can view feedback submitted by guests to improve hotel services.

8. Get in Touch Messages

[IMAGE PLACEHOLDER]

Short Description:
Admin can view messages sent by customers through the contact form.

9. Admin Login

[IMAGE PLACEHOLDER]

Short Description:
Admin can securely log in to the admin panel to manage all hotel operations.












7. Project Demo Video

[VIDEO PLACEHOLDER]

Description:
This video demonstrates the functionality of the hotel management website.

8. Technologies Used

The following technologies were used in this project:

Frontend:
HTML
CSS
Material UI
React.js
Axios

Backend:
Node.js
Express.js

Database:
MongoDB 

Tools:
Visual Studio Code
Git
Thunder Client

9. System Setup / Installation
To run the Hotel Management System on a local machine, the following steps should be followed.

Step 1: Install Required Software
Before running the project, install the following software:
Node.js
MongoDB
Code Editor (Visual Studio Code recommended)
These tools are required to run the backend server and manage the database.

Step 2: Configure Environment Variables
Create a .env file inside the backend folder and define the following environment variables.
MONGO_URI=mongodb://127.0.0.1:27017/hotelBooking
JWT_SECRET=mySuperSecretKey123
PORT=5000

Description
MONGO_URI → Connects the application to the MongoDB database
JWT_SECRET → Used for authentication and security tokens
PORT → Defines the port on which the backend server runs

Step 3: Install Project Dependencies
Open the terminal inside the project folder and install required packages.
For Backend:
npm install
For Frontend:
npm install
This command installs all the required libraries used in the project.

Step 4: Initialize Default System Data
Before running the system, initial data is added to the database using special scripts.

Admin Creation Script
A script named adminCreate.js is used to create the default administrator account in the system.
This script automatically inserts an admin user into the database so the admin panel can be accessed.
 Admin Login:
Email: adminAmna@example.com
Password: Admin@123

Room Seeding Script
Another script called seedRooms.js is used to insert predefined room data into the database.
This helps initialize the system with available rooms for testing and booking purposes.
The script adds information such as:
Room type
Price
Room availability
Room description

Step 5: Run the Backend Server
Navigate to the backend folder and start the server using the following command:
npm run dev
The backend server will start on:
http://localhost:5000

Step 6: Run the Frontend Application
Navigate to the frontend folder and start the frontend server:
npm start
The frontend application will open in the browser automatically.

Step 7: Access the Application
After starting both frontend and backend servers, open the application in the browser:
http://localhost:3000
Guests can browse rooms and make bookings, while the admin can log in to manage the system.



10. ER Diagram
[ER DIAGRAM PLACEHOLDER]

Entities example:
Users
Rooms
Bookings
Payments
Contact Messages
Feedbacks
Registertion Guest
Staff 

11. Students Who Worked on the Project

This project was developed by the following students:

Amna Saleem
Maheen Qamar
Laiba Inam

Each student contributed to different parts of the system such as:

Frontend development
Backend development
Database design
Testing
Documentation

12. Testing

The system was tested using:

Thunder Client
Browser testing

All major features were tested to ensure the system works correctly.

13. Future Improvements

Future improvements may include:
Online payment integration
Mobile application version
Advanced admin analytics

14. Conclusion

The Hotel Management Website successfully provides an online solution for hotel booking and management.
It improves efficiency and provides a better experience for customers and hotel administrators.

15. Acknowledgment

We would like to thank Sir Abdullah for their guidance and support during the development of this project.

Their knowledge and encouragement helped us successfully complete this project.
